https://blog.algomaster.io/p/message-queues

Message queue allows systsem to communicate aynchroously.
It acts as an intermediary b/w 2 systems communicating woth each other


when the procucer of messages want sto produce indenpdenlty of the consumer consuming it.


This leads to DECOUPLED SYSTEM


Throttling: Message queues can help control the rate of message processing,
preventing consumers from being overwhelmed.

Less coupled ....

Core Components of a Message Queue

1. Producer/publisher - producing msgs wihtout bothering abt the consumer state
2. COsumer
3. Message - Queue - to store the messages prcused by producr which can be used by consumer indenpendently
4. Message - A unit of data , (payload) along with some metadata


5. Broker -  The software or service that manages the message queue, 
handles the delivery of messages, and ensures that messages are routed
correctly between producers and consumers.


Acknowledgment: Once the consumer processes the message, 
it may send an acknowledgment back to the broker, confirming that the 
message has been successfully handled.

Message Deletion: After acknowledgment, the broker removes the message from the queue 
to prevent it from being processed again.

We may not always delete the msgs in multi consumer enviroment, as these consumers may read data at
their own pace, so  offfset comes into pic
each comsumer has it won offset...
once a sgs is sucessfully delivered, offset is increased .



Types of Message Queues

1. P2P  model, messages are sent from one producer to one consumer.
Used when a message needs to be processed by a single consumer

2. Pub/SUB - messages are published to a topic, and multiple consumers can subscribe to 
that topic to receive messages.


3. Dead Letter Queue (DLQ) : A special type of queue where messages that cannot be processed (due to errors or retries) are sent.
Useful for troubleshooting and handling failed messages.


This is used in banking system....WHere msgs are retried when there are temporary failkures, so as to not 
make a double payment...



4. Priority Queue




In microsrvice architectue its services can communicate via MQ. 
It allows services to communicate async without blocking other operations.






